# Central Authentication Service (CAS) Authentication

TBD.

## Redirecting Guests to CAS for Sign-In

By default, uPortal allows unauthenticated users (_"guests"_) to view the portal.  About half of
uPortal adopters use this feature to present general, non-sensitive content to the public.  (The
other uPortal adopters prefer to allow only authenticated users to access the portal.)  This feature
is one way to configure uPortal to require authentication.

To configure uPortal to redirect unauthenticated users to the CAS login UI, add the following
configuration option to `${portal.home}/uPortal.properties`:

```properties
cas.enable.redirect.guest.to.login=true
```

### Drawbacks of the CAS Redirect Feature

:warning: There are a few drawbacks to enabling this setting:

- This setting only works for CAS authentication (in the future, the uPortal community may offer a
single feature that supports multiple authentication strategies)
- Enabling this feature **disables every other form of authentication**
- This feature does not support _deep linking_ that survives the authentication process (_viz._ if
you are required to authenticate, you will not arrive at the page you were trying to reach if you
followed a link)

## CAS 5 ClearPass: Credential Caching and Replay

Starting in CAS 4, the former ClearPass feature has been depreciated in lieu of passing the password, encrypted, as any other user attribute. This does require additional coordination between CAS and uPortal with key sharing.

### Configuring CAS for passing encrypted passwords

See: <https://apereo.github.io/cas/5.0.x/integration/ClearPass.html> for CAS configuration.

### Create Keys (from the above page)

The keypair must be generated by the application itself that wishes to obtain the user credential. 
The public key is shared with CAS. The private key is used by uPortal to decrypt the credential.

```bash
openssl genrsa -out private.key 1024
openssl rsa -pubout -in private.key -out public.key -inform PEM -outform DER
openssl pkcs8 -topk8 -inform PER -outform DER -nocrypt -in private.key -out private.p8
```

Save `private.p8` in a well-known location.

### Change CAS Validate Filter to use CAS Protocol 3

uPortal uses an older version for it's CAS embedded service. To use this ClearPass feature,
the validation filter needs to be switched from CAS Protocol 2 to 3. This is simply done
by editing the classname of the filter in web.xml:

```xml
        <filter-class>org.jasig.cas.client.validation.Cas30ProxyReceivingTicketValidationFilter</filter-class>
```

### Configuring uPortal for accepting encrypted passwords

uPortal setup for this feature is straight-forward. The hardest part is configuring the location of the private key.

In uportal-war/src/main/resources/properties/security.properties make the following changes (assuming the key file was moved to `/etc/cas/private.p8`):

```properties
## Flag to determine if the portal should convert CAS assertion attributes to user attributes - defaults to false
org.apereo.portal.security.cas.assertion.copyAttributesToUserAttributes=true
 
## Flag to determine if credential attribute from CAS should be decrypted to password - defaults to false
org.apereo.portal.security.cas.assertion.decryptCredentialToPassword=true
 
## Unsigned private key in PKCS8 format for credential decryption (for decryptCredentialToPassword)
org.apereo.portal.security.cas.assertion.decryptCredentialToPasswordPrivateKey=/etc/cas/private.p8
```

:warning: **Warning: Cannot use localhost nor HTTP!** :warning:
CAS requires that the traffic pass over an encryped **HTTPS** connection. Also, a hostname other than *localhost* is required.
